[MUSIC PLAYING]
JEREMY: Hey, so Simon,
welcome back to Glasgow.
How many years did you
spend working here?
SIMON PEYTON JONES:
It was about nine,
but it felt much
longer at the time.
This is also the time my
children were being born
and it was a very important time
of change for the department.
So it was a very exciting time.
JEREMY: Well, as well
as your children being born,
the Haskell movement,
I suppose, was born.
SIMON PEYTON JONES: It was.
It slightly predated
my children, actually.
So they refer to Haskell
as my first child.
JEREMY: Oh I see.
Very good.
Now I think in the
past you've said
Glasgow is a kind of
spiritual home for Haskell.
Are those your precise words?
SIMON PEYTON JONES: I don't
know, but I kind of feel that.
Because Haskell was the fruit
of an international committee
of about 20 people.
But it just so happened
that several members
of the committee
were here at Glasgow.
So it was John Hughes, Phil
Wadler, myself, Kevin Hammond,
who became an editor
of the report.
And Will Partain became
involved a little later.
So there was quite a few
members of the Haskell Committee
who were just here at Glasgow.
So it was a sort of
epicenter, if you like.
JEREMY: The epicenter,
that's a nice word.
Very good, yes.
Now you spoke about
the committee.
And I think in terms of
programming languages, being
designed by committee is
not always a good thing.
SIMON PEYTON JONES:
It's not usually
regarded as being an advantage.
Because all of the languages
that you hear about,
Ruby, and Perl, and Python,
and so forth, they all
have quite clearly distinct
individual closure.
They have individual
people who designed them.
Or Pascal even longer ago.
So Haskell's very unusual
in being, A, designed
by a group, but B, nevertheless
being quite successful
over the long term.
JEREMY: There's
a wonderful quote
from Tony Hoare-- you
were reminding me of it
before-- where he
said he thought
Haskell was doomed to succeed.
Would you care to measure
the success of Haskell?
Do you think it's exceeded
your wildest dream?
SIMON PEYTON JONES:
Oh, it certainly has.
So I think what was in Tony's
mind is that Tony really
likes very small, conceptually
pure languages that are sort of
stripped down to their essence.
And Haskell, right
from the beginning,
it has a conceptual
core that's very small,
but it has quite a lot of
stuff around the outside.
There's more than one
syntax for doing this.
There's lets as well as wheres.
There's pattern matching as
well as case expressions.
And we thought
that was important.
So I think he felt it was
doomed to succeed because it
was made by a larger group.
But in fact no language
is doomed to succeed.
I think my expectation was
that Haskell would become
a useful research vehicle for
a number of research groups
who were working on lazy
functional programming
at the time and maybe
no more than that.
But in fact, it's been
solidly influential
over 2 and 1/2 decades.
And it's become a
kind of thought leader
in a way that has definitely
exceeded my expectations.
JEREMY: You
mentioned laziness there.
And I think that's one of the
unusual things about Haskell
compared to most mainstream
programming languages.
Can you give us a
kind of Idiot's Guide
to Laziness, please?
SIMON PEYTON JONES: So
laziness was, if you like,
the thing that brought that
particular group of people
together, was the single war
cry that sort of identified
what Haskell was at the time.
So lazy evaluation means,
let's procrastinate as much as
possible.
Let's not do any work unless
we absolutely have to.
So if you call a function and
you're passing it an argument,
well, let's not evaluate
the argument yet.
Let's pass to the function, the
kind of recipe or suspension,
which when the function
needs the argument,
it can evaluate it.
And if you want to regard
if, then, else as a function,
that's rather important.
Because you don't want
to do both the then part
and the else part.
Because you only want
to do one in them.
They're kind of
crucially important.
But then it turned out to be
more than just convenient.
John Hughes wrote this
very influential paper--
John Hughes, also
here at Glasgow--
called Why Functional
Programming Matters,
in which he described how
lazy evaluation allows you
to compose programs together
in a way that you couldn't.
You can write a
program that generates
all the possible moves in
a game tree, sort of all
the possible alternatives.
That is an infinite tree.
And then separately,
you could write
a program that walks over the
tree and picks the right one.
And in a eager language, you
have to meld those two passes
together into one.
But in a lazy language,
you can separate them.
So it's a powerful
modularity mechanism.
And also it's a powerful
purity mechanism.
It sort of forces
you to be pure,
which retrospectively
I think was the most
important thing about it.
JEREMY: Good.
There are noises in
the Haskell community
about becoming more
strict these days.
Is that something
you approve off?
SIMON PEYTON JONES: Oh yes, the
whole strict-lazy dichotomy.
So initially it was,
well, there was Haskell,
which was a lazy
language, and there
was Miranda, and SASL,
and a few others,
and there were strict languages.
And these were very
sort of different camps.
But over time, Haskell
has grown more strict,
we have strictness annotations
to allow the programmer more
control over evaluation order.
And indeed, the strict
languages also usually
have some kind of
thunking mechanism
to allow you to model
lazy evaluation.
So in fact I think
people now see it more
as a continuous spectrum.
It's more, what's the
default, rather than
a sort of way of life doctrine.
JEREMY: Yes,
I'd like to ask you
about Haskell applications
out in the real world.
Can you think of any examples of
perhaps very exotic deployments
of Haskell programs?
SIMON PEYTON JONES:
Oh well, so Haskell
is kind of strange, because it's
been quite a niche language.
So it's been difficult
for large companies
to start using Haskell in a
major way, because they're
always worried about how many
Haskell programmers there'll be
and will the Haskell compiler
continue to be supported?
So I think that Haskell as kind
of like a fungus or a mushroom.
You know the way that fungi
have these very long tendrils
under the ground.
So they're quite widespread,
but you can't see them?
JEREMY: Yeah.
So Haskell is quite widely used,
particularly in small startup
companies with the chief
technology officer--
Like there's a company called
SchedMe in New York doing
some kind of scheduling system.
And they're entirely
built in Haskell.
And their CEO is telling
me how they threw away
their Ruby code, and it was
just so much better in Haskell.
So it's used in small
companies quite a bit.
It's also used in some big
companies, particularly banks.
Every bank appears to have a
secret functional programming
group.
And quite often, that
functional programming group
is using Haskell.
So Standard Chartered,
for example,
has quite a big Haskell group.
In fact, they're
continually hiring people.
And they don't get their
quants, their traders,
to write Haskell directly, but
a lot of their infrastructure
is written in Haskell.
And when their quants
say, we want some new kind
of spreadsheet-oriented
tool, they'll
write spreadsheets that
invoke functions written
in Mu, which is essentially a
reimplementation of Haskell.
So Haskell has become
quite important
in a number of
financial settings.
And then Galois, founded by
John Launchbury, who is also
a graduate of this department.
So is now quite a
successful company
in the northwest United States.
And I was talking to Alice
Miller earlier on today.
They do a lot of safety
critical things using Haskell.
One example was they have
a domain-specific language
for writing the control systems
for cool quad copters.
So they write in this very
high-level language, which
is essentially Haskell,
and then they compile that
down to C, which runs
on the quad copter.
JEREMY: Here's a slightly
cheeky question, Simon.
What's your second favorite
programming language
after Haskell presumably
is your first?
SIMON PEYTON JONES: Difficult
question, yes, because they're
a long way behind.
I think I'd have to say Excel.
JEREMY: Right?
That's interesting.
SIMON PEYTON JONES:
Most people don't
think of Excel as a
programming language at all.
But it is, right?
And moreover, it's a functional
programming language, which
everybody believes should
be fun-- They don't even
think of it as func-- They don't
even think they're programming.
They're modeling.
So what I would
like to do is to get
Excel to be more up front about
being a functional programming
language, and particularly to
support user-defined functions
and rich data structures,
records and arrays ways
and so forth.
And then in my grand
vision, we would
teach Excel as our first
programming language.
Because anything you
can do in Haskell,
ultimately you could do in Excel
if you could do all of this.
That would be pretty exciting.
So my second favorite
programming language
is not Excel as it
is today, but Excel
as I hope it might be one day.
JEREMY: Good.
This is my last
question now, Simon.
You've written an
article about how Haskell
is like wearing a hair shirt.
Now I want you to give some
encouraging words to novice
Haskell programmers, people
who are learning about Haskell
in our course and maybe
finding it quite difficult.
What would you say to encourage
them to pursue functional
programming?
SIMON PEYTON JONES:
Functional programming,
particularly if you're used to
writing in imperative programs,
does feel a bit like rewiring
your brain, which can feel
a little bit painful at first.
But the experience is once
you come through that pain,
you look at the entire--
functional programming
is kind of like a radical
and eloquent attack
on the entire enterprise
of writing programs.
It's not like, well, I'm
just going to switch syntax.
It's just C# instead of Java.
It's a whole different way of
thinking about the problem.
And if you think about
complex problems, and programs
are the most complex artifacts
that human beings have ever
built. If you think about
complex problems in a new way,
that could shed really
new light on it.
So I think one of the
interesting things
about Haskell in particular, is
it sticks remorselessly purely
to one central idea, which
is a programming with values
and functions rather
than programming
with mutation and side effects.
And most other functional
programming languages
sort of dice with
the devil a bit
and do quite a lot
of side effects.
Haskell is pretty
remorselessly pure about that.
And that kind of
educates you continually
into this new way of thinking.
I'll just give one tiny example.
Sometimes you do want
to do mutating things,
and we do that using monads.
When you want
concurrent threads that
are doing I/O in the world,
so they must be concurrent,
they must interact with each
other in some stateful way,
a good way to make them interact
is using transactional memory.
So transactional
memory is something
that's quite hard to do
in imperative languages,
because in principle, every
mutation of every memory
location must be tracked.
But in Haskell, because the
mutation of mutable locations
are so carefully
partitioned in the type
system-- and a
little bit awkward
to get at as a programmer--
then there are very few of them.
So transactional memory systems
are efficient and effective.
And indeed they come
out of the box with GHC.
JEREMY: Simon,
thank you very much.
SIMON PEYTON JONES: It's
been great talking to you.
It's really nice to be
back in Glasgow actually.
[MUSIC PLAYING]